Project Summary
The original intent of this project was to explore vehicle sales data to evaluate trends based on the types of vehicles being sold (i.e. SUV, passenger car, light truck, etc.). As the project developed, the intent changed into an analysis of fatalities based on the vehicle type (i.e. is there an appreciable association between fatalities and type of vehicles involved in the crash?). A further question was considered – does the number of each vehicle type sold annually coincide with the number of fatalities observed in each vehicle type?
It was the assumption of this student that smaller vehicles would tend to be involved in a higher number of fatal crashes, given that larger vehicles are generally more robust. It was also this student’s assumption that the more a vehicle type sold, the more fatal crashes that vehicle type would be involved in. In other words, if more trucks than cars were sold in a year, it would seem logical that there would be more fatal crashes involving trucks in subsequent years because there more of them on the road.
A dataset of fatalities statistics from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) was obtained from their online tool and combined with a Kaggle dataset of vehicle sales from the early 1980s through 2015. The fatalities dataset did not extend to years earlier than 1994, so the vehicle sales dataset was modified to exclude those earlier years. This left a final, cleaned dataset covering the years 1994 to 2015.
Key Findings
The analysis revealed that the answer to the first question (i.e. is one vehicle type involved in more crashes than the other?) revealed that initially, the answer was yes. From 1994 thru approximately 2007, there was a marked difference in that passenger cars were involved at significantly higher rates of fatal crashes than passenger trucks. However, for the period of 2008 thru 2015, the rates of fatal crashes by vehicle were much more closely aligned, though passenger car fatalities still appeared to remain slightly higher (reference scatterplot Fatalities by Vehicle Type, 1994-2015).
Interestingly, the figure entitled Vehicles Sold by Type, 1994-2015 showed that vehicle sales generally climbed for both vehicle types year over year (with 2009 and 2010 being an exception – remember the Great Recession?). But even more striking was that in nearly every year, passenger car sales outstripped light truck sales by a significant margin. This leads to the conclusion that this information, when coupled with the fatalities information, indicates that there is no appreciable correlation between the number of any type of vehicle sold and the number of fatalities a given vehicle type is involved in.
Inconsistencies, Limitations, Issues
The vehicle sales dataset had nearly 11,000 null (missing) values for certain parameters. However, the entire dataset contained nearly 600,000 rows of data. The null values represented about 1% of the entire dataset. Therefore, those null values were dropped from the dataset for analysis as it was presumed that they wouldn’t make any appreciable difference.
The NHTSA makes available fatalities data for vehicle types beyond light trucks and passenger cars, to include large trucks, motorcycles, buses, and others. However, the sales data only included passenger cars and light trucks (i.e. Ford F-150s or Chevy 1500-series). Other vehicle types were not included. As such, only the passenger car and light truck data were utilized from the fatalities dataset to better mesh with the vehicle sales dataset.

